---
title: "Overview"
weight: 1
type: docs
aliases:
- /development/overview.html
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Overview

This document provides a brief introduction to the basic concepts in Flink ML. 

## Table API

Flink ML's API is based on Flink's Table API. The Table API is a
language-integrated query API for Java, Scala, and Python that allows the
composition of queries from relational operators such as selection, filter, and
join in a very intuitive way.

Table API allows the usage of a wide range of data types. [Flink Document Data
Types](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.14/docs/dev/table/types/)
page provides a list of supported types. In addition to these types, Flink ML
also provides support for `Vector` Type.

The Table API integrates seamlessly with Flink’s DataStream API. You can easily
switch between all APIs and libraries which build upon them. Please refer to
Flink's document for how to convert between `Table` and `DataStream`, as well as
other usage of Flink Table API.

## Stage

A `Stage` is a node in a `Pipeline` or `Graph`. It is the fundamental component
in Flink ML. This interface is only a concept, and does not have any actual
functionality. Its subclasses include the follows.

- `Estimator`: An `Estimator` is a `Stage` that is reponsible for the training
  process in machine learning algorithms. It implements a `fit()` method that
  takes a list of tables and produces a `Model`.

- `AlgoOperator`: An `AlgoOperator` is a `Stage` that is used to encode generic
  multi-input multi-output computation logic. It implements a `transform()`
  method, which applies certain computation logic on the given input tables and
  returns a list of result tables.

- `Transformer`: A `Transformer` is an `AlgoOperator` with the semantic
  difference that it encodes the Transformation logic, such that a record in the
  output typically corresponds to one record in the input. In contrast, an
  `AlgoOperator` is a better fit to express aggregation logic where a record in
  the output could be computed from an arbitrary number of records in the input.

- `Model`: A `Model` is a `Transformer` with the extra APIs to set and get model
  data. It is typically generated by fitting an `Estimator` on a list of tables.
  It provides `getModelData()` and `setModelData()`, which allows users to
  explicitly read or write model data tables to the transformer. Each table
  could be an unbounded stream of model data changes.

A typical usage of `Stage` is to create an `Estimator` instance first, trigger
its training process by invoking its `fit()` method, and to perform predictions
with the resulting `Model` instance. This example usage is shown in the code
below.

```java
// Suppose SumModel is a concrete subclass of Model, SumEstimator is a concrete subclass of Estimator.

Table trainData = ...;
Table predictData = ...;

SumEstimator estimator = new SumEstimator();
SumModel model = estimator.fit(trainData);
Table predictResult = model.transform(predictData)[0];
```

## Builders

In order to organize Flink ML stages into more complexed format so as to achieve
advanced functionalities, like chaining data processing and machine learning
algorithms together, Flink ML provides APIs that help to manage the relationship
and structure of stages in Flink jobs. The entry of these APIs includes
`Pipeline` and `Graph`.

### Pipeline

A `Pipeline` acts as an `Estimator`. It consists of an ordered list of stages,
each of which could be an `Estimator`, `Model`, `Transformer` or `AlgoOperator`.
Its `fit()` method goes through all stages of this pipeline in order and does
the following on each stage until the last `Estimator` (inclusive).

- If a stage is an `Estimator`, it would invoke the stage's `fit()` method with
  the input tables to generage a `Model`. And if there is `Estimator` after this
  stage, it would transform the input tables using the generated `Model` to get
  result tables, then pass the result tables to the next stage as inputs.
- If a stage is an `AlgoOperator` AND there is `Estimator` after this stage, it
  would transform the input tables using this stage to get result tables, then
  pass the result tables to the next stage as inputs.

After all the `Estimators` are trained to fit their input tables, a new
`PipelineModel` will be created with the same stages in this pipeline, except
that all the `Estimator`s in the `PipelineModel` are replaced with the models
generated in the above process.

A `PipelineModel` acts as a `Model`. It consists of an ordered list of stages,
each of which could be a `Model`, `Transformer` or `AlgoOperator`. Its
`transform()` method applies all stages in this `PipelineModel` on the input
tables in order. The output of one stage is used as the input of the next stage
(if any). The output of the last stage is returned as the result of this method.

A `Pipeline` can be created by passing a list of `Stage`s to Pipeline's
constructor. For example,

```java
// Suppose SumModel is a concrete subclass of Model, SumEstimator is a concrete subclass of Estimator.

Model modelA = new SumModel().setModelData(tEnv.fromValues(10));
Estimator estimatorA = new SumEstimator();
Model modelB = new SumModel().setModelData(tEnv.fromValues(30));

List<Stage<?>> stages = Arrays.asList(modelA, estimatorA, modelB);
Estimator<?, ?> estimator = new Pipeline(stages);
```

The commands above creates a Pipeline like follows.

{{< mermaid >}}

graph LR

empty0[ ] --> modelA --> estimatorA --> modelB --> empty1[ ]

style empty0 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;
style empty1 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;

{{< /mermaid >}}

### Graph

A `Graph` acts as an `Estimator`. A `Graph` consists of a DAG of stages, each of
which could be an `Estimator`, `Model`, `Transformer` or `AlgoOperator`. When
`Graph::fit` is called, the stages are executed in a topologically-sorted order.
If a stage is an `Estimator`, its `Estimator::fit` method will be called on the
input tables (from the input edges) to fit a `Model`. Then the `Model` will be
used to transform the input tables and produce output tables to the output
edges. If a stage is an `AlgoOperator`, its `AlgoOperator::transform` method
will be called on the input tables and produce output tables to the output
edges. The `GraphModel` fitted from a `Graph` consists of the fitted `Models`
and `AlgoOperators`, corresponding to the `Graph`'s stages.

A `GraphModel` acts as a `Model`. A `GraphModel` consists of a DAG of stages,
each of which could be an `Estimator`, `Model`, `Transformer` or `AlgoOperator`.
When `GraphModel::transform` is called, the stages are executed in a
topologically-sorted order. When a stage is executed, its
`AlgoOperator::transform` method will be called on the input tables (from the
input edges) and produce output tables to the output edges.

A `Graph` can be constructed via the `GraphBuilder` class, which provides
methods like `addAlgoOperator` or `addEstimator` to help adding stages to a
graph. Flink ML also introduces `TableId` class to represent the input/output of
a stage and to help express the relationship between stages in a graph, thus
allowing users to construct the DAG before they have the concrete tables
available.

The example codes below shows how to build a `Graph`.

```java
// Suppose SumModel is a concrete subclass of Model.

GraphBuilder builder = new GraphBuilder();
// Creates nodes.
SumModel stage1 = new SumModel().setModelData(tEnv.fromValues(1));
SumModel stage2 = new SumModel();
SumModel stage3 = new SumModel().setModelData(tEnv.fromValues(3));
// Creates inputs and modelDataInputs.
TableId input = builder.createTableId();
TableId modelDataInput = builder.createTableId();
// Feeds inputs and gets outputs.
TableId output1 = builder.addAlgoOperator(stage1, input)[0];
TableId output2 = builder.addAlgoOperator(stage2, output1)[0];
builder.setModelDataOnModel(stage2, modelDataInput);
TableId output3 = builder.addAlgoOperator(stage3, output2)[0];
TableId modelDataOutput = builder.getModelDataFromModel(stage3)[0];

// Builds a Model from the graph.
TableId[] inputs = new TableId[] {input};
TableId[] outputs = new TableId[] {output3};
TableId[] modelDataInputs = new TableId[] {modelDataInput};
TableId[] modelDataOutputs = new TableId[] {modelDataOutput};
Model<?> model = builder.buildModel(inputs, outputs, modelDataInputs, modelDataOutputs);
```

The code above constructs a `Graph` like follows.

{{< mermaid >}}

graph LR

empty0[ ] --> |input| stage1
stage1 --> |output1| stage2
empty1[ ] --> |modelDataInput| stage2
stage2 --> |output2| stage3
stage3 --> |output3| empty3[ ]
stage3 --> |modelDataOutput| empty2[ ]

style empty0 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;
style empty1 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;
style empty2 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;
style empty3 fill:#FFFFFF, stroke:#FFFFFF;

{{< /mermaid >}}

## Parameter

Flink ML `Stage` is a subclass of `WithParams`, which provides a uniform API to
get and set parameters.

A `Param` is the definition of a parameter, including name, class, description,
default value and the validator.

In order to set the parameter of an algorithm, users can use any of the
following ways.

- Invoke the parameter's specific set method. For example, in order to set `K`,
  the number of clusters, of a K-means algorithm, users can directly invoke
  `setK()` method on that `KMeans` instance.
- Pass a parameter map containing new values to the stage through
  `ReadWriteUtils.updateExistingParams()` method.

If a `Model` is generated through an `Estimator`'s `fit()` method, the `Model`
would inherit the `Estimator` object's parameters. Thus there is no need to set
the parameters for a second time if the parameters are not changed.
